docs: add text embeddings guide and release notes for PR #1346 (#1687)
NVIDIA/NeMo-Curator: fern/versions/v26.04/pages/curate-text/process-data/embeddings/vllm-embedder.mdx

content_type: "how-to"
modality: "text-only"
---

# vLLM Embedder

Generate text embeddings using vLLM's optimized inference engine. The `VLLMEmbeddingModelStage` provides high-throughput embedding generation, particularly for large embedding models where vLLM's batching and GPU memory management provide significant performance advantages over Sentence Transformers.

<Note>
**Installation**: The vLLM embedder is included in the `text_cuda12` installation. Install it with:

```bash
uv pip install nemo_curator[text_cuda12]
```

vLLM is only available on x86_64 Linux systems.
</Note>

## How It Works

`VLLMEmbeddingModelStage` is a single-stage embedder that handles both tokenization and embedding generation within one stage. Unlike `EmbeddingCreatorStage` (which splits tokenization and model inference into separate stages), the vLLM embedder delegates all GPU operations to vLLM's inference engine.

Key features:

- **Optional pretokenization**: When `pretokenize=True`, the stage tokenizes text on CPU before passing tokens to vLLM, reducing GPU idle time and improving throughput
- **vLLM-managed batching**: Leverages vLLM's built-in request scheduling for optimal GPU utilization

> - **Model download caching**: Automatically downloads and caches models from HuggingFace Hub

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Model download caching**: Automatically downloads and caches models from Hugging Face Hub
```

        ParquetWriter(path="output/", fields=["text", "embeddings"]),
    ],
)

executor = XennaExecutor()
pipeline.run(executor)
```

## Configuration

### Parameters

| Parameter | Type | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `model_identifier` | `str` | Required | HuggingFace model name or path for the embedding model |
| `vllm_init_kwargs` | `dict` | `None` | Additional keyword arguments passed to `vllm.LLM()` for engine configuration |
| `text_field` | `str` | `"text"` | Name of the input text column in the data |
| `pretokenize` | `bool` | `False` | Tokenize text on CPU before passing to vLLM. Recommended for best throughput |
| `embedding_field` | `str` | `"embeddings"` | Name of the output embedding column |
| `max_chars` | `int` | `None` | Maximum characters per document (truncates before tokenization) |
| `cache_dir` | `str` | `None` | Directory for caching downloaded model files |
| `hf_token` | `str` | `None` | HuggingFace token for accessing gated models |
| `verbose` | `bool` | `False` | Enable verbose logging and progress bars |

### vLLM Engine Options

Pass additional vLLM configuration through `vllm_init_kwargs`:

```python
VLLMEmbeddingModelStage(

>     model_identifier="google/gemma-embedding-model",

Reviewer: Same comment as above.

    pretokenize=True,
    vllm_init_kwargs={
        "enforce_eager": True,       # Disable CUDA graph for debugging
        "tensor_parallel_size": 2,   # Distribute across 2 GPUs
        "gpu_memory_utilization": 0.9,
        "max_model_len": 512,
    },
)
```

Default vLLM settings applied by the stage (can be overridden):

- `enforce_eager=False` — Uses CUDA graphs for faster inference
- `runner="pooling"` — Configures vLLM for embedding (pooling) tasks
- `model_impl="vllm"` — Uses vLLM's native model implementation
- `disable_log_stats=True` — Suppresses stats logging when `verbose=False`

### Pretokenization

When `pretokenize=True`, the stage:

1. Loads a HuggingFace `AutoTokenizer` for the specified model
2. Tokenizes the input text batch on CPU with truncation to `max_model_len`
3. Passes token IDs directly to vLLM using `TokensPrompt`

> This mode is recommended for production workloads. Benchmarks show it provides the best per-task throughput across both small and large embedding models by reducing GPU idle time during tokenization.

Reviewer: `pretokenize=False` is recommended (for Embedding Gemma), that is why it is the default for semantic deduplication. It can be very model dependent.
